node -v
node -pe process.release.lts

npm install -g hapi	#express.js replacement
npm install -g angular
npm install -g ember-cli

#Node js Tutorial with Visual Studio
Developers, have you heard about Visual Studio Code? Far more than a text editor, it works cross platform, looks great, has a ton of cool features, and is becoming increasingly popular! Check it out, with the always-entertaining experts Stacey Mulcahy and Rami Sayar, and see how to use Visual Studio Code to create sites using Node.js (one of the easiest and fastest ways to develop real-time apps on the web today).

Walk through the tool's features, learn how to customize them, and explore the key commands. See how to create a basic REST API using Node.js with Express, connect your web app to a database, and learn how to debug Node.js apps using Visual Studio Code. Plus, see how to deploy your sites to Microsoft Azure, and create, test, and schedule Azure Web Jobs. Watch helpful demos, and get lots of practical tips on making the most of this exciting tool.

1 | Introduction to Node.js
Explore what Node.js is, its benefits, who is using it, and how to get started. See demos on writing your first Node.js app and on a basic HTTP server. Begin building a basic chat application.

2 | Introduction to Express
See why Express is one of the most popular web frameworks used with Node.js. Get the basics, and watch how to create a basic REST API using Node.js with Express.

3 | Express and Databases
Find out how you can connect your Express web app to a database.

4 | Building a Front End for Your Express Web Apps
See how to build front ends using Jade and Bootstrap for your Express web app.

5 | Debugging and Deploying Node.js
Focus on best practices for debugging node.js apps and deploying Node.js on Azure with Azure Websites and Virtual Machines.

6 | Extending Node.js with Azure Web Jobs
Explore techniques to extend your Node.js application on Azure with Web Jobs. Find out how to deploy, test, and schedule Azure Web Jobs. 

codegeek, codektv
Source via: Channel9 - MVA

