Dual Clutch Transmission
CVT: Continuously Variable Transmission

https://drivingfast.net/rev-matching/
Rev matching is used when down-shifting to smooth the transition between gears and prevent shock loads through the transmission. It’s a useful skill for the road and track for both cars and motorcycles.
Changing up / up-shifting
Lower gears provide greater acceleration due to the mechanical advantage of the gearing and the higher engine speeds. Therefore, when accelerating hold on the lower gears for as long as you can, but be careful not to hit the rev limiter as this only slows you down. Only change up when the engine has passed through the upper limits of the power band, not before.

Changing down / down-shifting
When approaching a corner, you need to select a gear which will provide maximum acceleration at the exit, and this gear needs to be engaged before entering the corner. This means braking to the speed where you can safely turn into the bend, then shifting before turning in. Ideally you’ll need to select a gear which will cause the engine speed to increase to a sensible point within the power band so that plenty of power is available when accelerating out of the turn for that quick exit.

However if you select the correct gear and let out the clutch swiftly, three things will happen:
Significant levels of engine braking will occur
In extreme cases, the wheels can lock up (image selecting second gear at 80 mph and dumping the clutch)
A forward weight transfer will occur
None of these are good when you’re trying to maintain control of a car driving near the limits of grip. Rev matching is the solution to these potential issues.

Introduction to rev matching
Rev matching is a technique which should be second nature if you want to be quick on the track and smooth on the road.

When is it used?
When changing down to create smooth, fast gear changes in a car with synchromesh. Almost all modern cars have synchromesh, if you don’t have it fitted you will need to ‘double de-clutch’ (you’ll know).

What rev matching does:
Reduces stress on the drive-line
Prevents forward weight transfers when down shifting
Reduces engine braking and chances of wheel lock
Note: On the track, the general rule is to use the brakes to slow down and the engine to accelerate. Engine braking is not efficient, and will not slow you down quickly enough for track use. If you have time to use engine braking, you’re not going as quickly as you could.


https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cBV113mAowE
Won't you "burn" the clutch if you add throttle when it's put in?
> Not if the clutch is all the way in, if it's at the biting point with throttle+revs then you'd start burning the clutch up eventually.

Do you have to press the gas when shifting a gear, like as you let the clutch out? Or does the throttle not affect anything?
> yes, as you press the clutch in, the revs drop, so give it a tad bit of gas to up the revs at the same time as you let the clutch out.
>> Only if you are lowering your gears. For upshifts, you do not need to give throttle until after you let the clutch out.


heel & toe gear change (racing downshift): https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6CfduI-cRCk

How to Heel-Toe and Double Clutch Downshift (with detailed description): https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ucwtXkCfcbI

Dual Clutch vs Manual Transmission (DCT vs MT): https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e02K1pLfMeE

Does the clutch pedal is more softer to push when the engine is running than when its not running?
> No, it's always the same.

When changing up into 2nd gear, its just jerky.
> look in your owner's manual for the recommended rev for 1 to second gear. There is a recommendation there, which will work as a starting point. Also, experiment with lower revs. What is suggest is ascending revs as you move up in the gears. In my Honda with a 2.0L engine I've shifted 3 gears before getting through an intersection. The faster you get through the gears, the better fuel mileage you're going to achieve. All the best, Cheers Rick.
>> My teacher taught me to pretend you're pulling up in first when you switch to second, so let out the clutch slowly while feeding in the throttle. Helped me alot. No idea  if it's good or bad for the car but it's reallly smooth compared to just shifting normally.
>>> That is great advice. Yes, bring the clutch out to the friction point and then control the pedal through that approximately one inch where the two plates in the clutch are coming together - as you said. And like you said, as your moving the clutch through the friction zone (biting) start giving throttle. All the best, Cheers Rick.

Downshifting - full throttle for a short time. exercise. it differs from car to car. Upshifting - no throttle - just shift quickly.

When to rev match?
> When you want to go fast or drive aggressively. If you drive slowly, normally, regularly, you can slowly release the clutch and everything is smooth. For enthusiasts or if you want to shift fast and smooth, you need to rev match.

I saw many videos doing upshifts through double clutching. What are your thoughts about it? In this video you are rev matching without double clutching, are you not going hard on your clutch doing this?
> Nope. It takes a few weeks to learn your car's throttle perfectly. After that, you can downshift perfectly, smoothly, without double clutching. Double clutching slows you down, rev matching helps you downshift faster. My clutch is in excellent condition.

Modern cars have synchromesh transmissions

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W42zsFYjZvM
Dual Clutch Transmission Vehicle

https://www.rac.co.uk/drive/advice/driving-advice/driving-habits-that-damage-your-car/
Dragging the brakes downhill
Flooring the accelerator in a high gear
Overloading vehicle
Shifting from drive to reverse before stopping
Revving the engine when cold
Hitting potholes and speed bumps
Late braking
Riding the clutch
Neglecting warning lights
Resting hand on the gearstick

https://www.rac.co.uk/drive/advice/car-maintenance/ways-to-make-your-car-last-longer/
Drive smoothly… most of the time
Replace spark plugs and leads
Change filters regularly
Check tyres
High Performance Driving: Heel-Toe Downshifting

large engine, rigid transmission, heavy flywheel
when clutch is completely released (and throttle is being depressed?) = clutch is fully engaged

Resting your hand on your shifter will cause unnecessary wear on your selector forks. Putting any pressure at all on your shifter is damaging your selector forks. If you are trying for racing shifts, you need to double clutch it. Your revs from 2nd gear will be way to high to transition into 3rd. Doing a full shift from 2nd to 3rd at high rpms will damage your stabilizer bars.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q4AW_1hz6Rg
This is the second lesson, and you will learn to combine the clutch with the throttle and brake. However, without clutch control, you are going to have difficulty driving a manual car. So if you haven't look at lesson #1, be sure to view this video: https://youtu.be/iW2Q7lIxrRo

EXERCISE #1 - hold the brake with your right foot and bring the clutch out to the friction point with your left. When you're at the friction point, the tachometer will drop 1-200 rpm and you will feel the vehicle vibrate a bit. When you have the clutch at the friction point, the vehicle can now be held by the clutch. Hold the clutch at the friction point and move your right foot from the brake to the throttle. In a gas or petrol engine car, rev the motor up to 1,000-1,200rpm and control the clutch through the friction zone. Move your left foot off the clutch smoothly and as quickly as possible. Take your foot off the clutch to prevent premature wear.

EXERCISE #2 – after developing competency with the first exercise, move reverse gear and do the same exercise. Hold the brake with your right foot and bring the clutch out to the friction point with your left. When you're at the friction point, you will feel the vehicle vibrate a bit. You can't look at the tachometer, because you should be looking out the rear window of the vehicle.
That is why it is important to become competent with exercise #1.

Exercise #3 - when you are competent with the first two exercises, move to working the clutch and the brake. In this exercise it is the same as the above: hold the brake with your right foot and bring the clutch out to the friction point with your left. When you're at the friction point, the tachometer will drop 1-200 rpm and you will feel the vehicle vibrate a bit. When you have the clutch at the friction point, the vehicle can now be held by the clutch. Hold the clutch at the friction point and move your right foot from the brake to the throttle. In a gas or petrol engine car, rev the motor up to 1,000-1,200rpm and control the clutch through the friction zone. Move your left foot off the clutch smoothly and as quickly as possible. Take your foot off the clutch to prevent premature wear.

Now you're going to throttle up to 2,000-3,000 rpm and then move right foot from the throttle and brake down to 1,000rpm. When the tachometer goes to 1,000 rpm push the clutch in and bring the vehicle to a complete stop.

Exercise #4 - when you are competent with the first three exercises, move to working the clutch and the brake in reverse. In this exercise it is the same as the above: hold the brake with your right foot and bring the clutch out to the friction point with your left. When you're at the friction point, you will feel the vehicle vibrate a bit. You won't be able to look out the tachometer, because you must be looking out the rear window. When you have the clutch at the friction point, the vehicle can now be held by the clutch. Hold the clutch at the friction point and move your right foot from the brake to the throttle. In a gas or petrol engine car, rev the motor up to 1,000-1,200rpm and control the clutch through the friction zone. Move your left foot off the clutch smoothly and as quickly as possible. Take your foot off the clutch to prevent premature wear.

Now you're going to throttle up to 2,000-3,000 rpm and then move right foot from the throttle and brake down to 1,000rpm. When the tachometer goes to 1,000 rpm push the clutch in and bring the vehicle to a complete stop.

When you have the clutch at the friction point, the vehicle can now be held by the clutch. Hold the clutch at the friction point and move your right foot from the brake to the throttle. In a gas or petrol engine car, rev the motor up to 1,000-1,200rpm and control the clutch through the friction zone. Move your left foot off the clutch smoothly and as quickly as possible. Take your foot off the clutch to prevent premature wear.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kTQCvLWLeLM
freeplay of clutch = friction zone = from top of clutch to friction point(or biting point)

If you are driving a vehicle fitted with a manual transmission, the specific gears, their speeds and the revs of the engine will be in the owner's manual. If you are driving an older vehicle, the owner's manual will be in paper form, early-2000s, the owner's manual will be electronic, and if you have a new vehicle with telematics, the owner's manual will be on the vehicle's display.
When shifting a manual transmission for fuel economy: the lowest rev/rpm for the highest gear will give you maximum fuel economy. As well, the faster you get through the gears, this technique too will give you better fuel economy.
Think strategically about where you're going to practice to learn to shift through the gears. Start off in a parking lot or other quiet area where there isn't too much traffic and you can concentrate on shifting the transmission.
When shifting through the gears, take your foot off the throttle, depress the clutch pedal, move the gear selector, and then let the clutch out to the friction point and control the clutch through the friction zone. When you've completely released the clutch, then depress the throttle. This technique will extend the life of your clutch.
In most 4-cylinder petrol engines you will shift at approximately 2,500-3,000 rpm. If you are driving a 4-cylinder diesel engine, you will shift at approximately 1,200-1,500 rpm. These are just general starting points.
As you get more and more experience driving a manual transmission, you will hear the engine and not have to look at the tachometer as much to know when to shift the vehicle.
To make right hand turns, most often you will shift down to second gear to go around the corner. For left-hand turns, most of the time you will shift down to third gear to go around the corner.

When you are less than 1,000 rpm can I step on the clutch first before I can step on the brake to stop the car smoothly? or I need to step on the brake first before stepping on the clutch? My problem is I am not stopping the car smoothly because I used to step on the clutch first before braking.
> Step on the brake first to bring the tachometer down to approximately 1,000 rpm. You'll hear the motor start to re-engage with the drive train. When you learn when that point is on your vehicle--usually 900-1,000--you push the clutch in and come to a complete stop.

Essentially first gear is for putting vehicle in motion or for starting on an incline. Vehicle is brought to a standstill in second gear because shifting to first from second gear with vehicle in motion can actually damage the gearbox. Is skipping gears when downshifting recommendable?
> One of the things that you have to do when shifting a manual transmission is match the road speed to the gear. If you're going slow enough--below 10kph or 5mph--you  can shift to first gear. If you're going faster than that road speed--yes--you could potentially damage the transmission. And yes, you can skip gears in a manual transmission. It doesn't happen very often in a passenger vehicle, but when turning right, you can shift from 4th to 2nd gear, and we'll see that in the next lesson. As well if you're going down a hill, you can shift from 2nd to 4th gear and just "feather" the throttle.

Maybe my car is different, or I havent gotten clutch control down yet. But when shifting through the gears I have to press clutch, shift and give GAS, Before clutch is completely out. Or at least that's the way it feels. 
If I let clutch all the way out then gas, the car jerks.
Also at low speeds say through a parking lot, what's it mean when the car is almost skipping, usually second gear.
> What kind of vehicle do you have? For the first issue I believe that you are right about the clutch control. Because you do have to control the clutch through the friction point to get a smooth shift. If you continue to give throttle when letting out the clutch after first gear, you'll prematurely wear out the clutch. If the car is skipping at low speeds, I would think that the road speed is too low for the gear. If there is anything further we can do, drop us a note. Always happy to help. All the best, Cheers Rick.

When you come to a complete stop you’re supposed to be on 1st not neutral? And also near the end when you were on 4th gear and went into 2nd you skipped 3rd gear? Are we allowed to skip gears?
> Come to a complete stop in whatever gear you're in, and when the vehicle comes to a complete stop, shift the selector back to first gear in preparation to go. And yes, you can skip gears. All the best, Cheers Rick.

Prolong the life of your clutch by putting the transmission into neutral when waiting at a light.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DQbtbVhOI8Q
How to do a Hill Start in a Manual Car | Manual Transmission Smart

Spin the tyres on a hill start?? Wow, instant fail in Australia. Apply handbrake, gently on the gas, clutch to friction point as you're releasing the handbrake. Much, much easier, very controlled and prevents stalling.
> Hi Al Uishious - Thank you for your comment. That part of the video wasn't really for license purposes. It was to show drivers how to preserve the clutch on their vehicle - especially new drivers that don't understand that they can damage the clutch by not getting the clutch out quickly. I lived in Australia - there really aren't hills per se in that country - more gentle grades. These hills I'm on here in Vernon, BC are 16% grade - a lot of throttle is required to get the vehicle started. And due to the amount of throttle required, you're either going to spin the clutch or the tires - better the tires than the clutch. All the best, Cheers Rick.
> Hi Al Uishious - Thank you for your comment. And you are so right about the disparity. Here on YouTube, I've become an international driving instructor, and I'm always working to understand other driving cultures. I believe that one of the major differences that make one 2L massive and the other smaller is the size of the vehicle. The vehicles themselves in Europe are smaller, which increase the horsepower to weight ratio. In my Honda CRV, the 2L is balanced for the vehicle; that engine is by no means "peppy".  More like, the little engine that could!!  80) All the best my friend, Cheers Rick.

Question: Does your clutch overheats  when holding it all the way down for a  while, Especially on  uphill traffic?
> Hi Jonathan Suniga - Apologies for the late response. Thank you for your query. No, you won't overheat your clutch when you have the pedal depressed. It will overheat if you don't get the clutch out all the way quickly when applying the throttle. If there is anything further we can do, drop us a note. Always happy to help. All the best, Cheers Rick.

When parking on an up hill or down hill what gear should the vehicle be in?
> Most of the time I put it in 1st gear.

i managed to identify the biting point...yet when i step off the breaks and try to maneuver the engine goes off. not sure if its because i stepped on the excel too quick or what!? the car didn't stall but the engine went off. i'm watching all the way in South Africa. thanks.
> Hi Marching - thanks for your comment and query. I'm not exactly sure what you mean by "the engine went off." For the purposes of hill starts, you have to give the engine a lot of throttle in the instant you release the clutch. You might try applying the parking brake--if it's a hand lever--and getting the clutch to the biting point, give the engine lots of throttle, and then releasing the parking brake - that might work as a better technique for you. Let me know how it goes. All the best, Cheers Rick.

Smart Drive Test I love your videos a whole lot. I'd just like to point out something about your handbrake method. When you are  a beginner learning to drive manual on a hill there are two things you have to worry about when starting from a stop. Stalling and Rolling back. The English handbrake method is supposed to remove the risk of both of these things occurring, your method basically still carries with it the risk of stalling. In fact your handbrake method is the exact same as your footbrake method in my opinion. The true handbrake method does NOT require you to bring the clutch up to its biting point/friction zone until AFTER you set the gas to maybe about 2500-3000 rpm. Since engine rpm is above idling which is about 1000rpm even if you bring the clutch up higher your car is not going to be at risk of stalling, in fact we are mostly aware that you can drive your vehicle with the handbrake engaged. In both of your methods you find the biting point before setting the gas and a learner who comes a little bit more off the clutch not being aware that they are already at the biting point will stall. A benefit of the English method is with respect to driving a new car with a different bite point you will not risk stalling. Just like learning to drive manual for the first time if you practice this enough it soon becomes second nature and you could come to a complete stop and move off within a second or two with no rollback and no risk of stalling.
> ou are correct my friend; however, it is important to work on habits that are going to prolong the life of your vehicle and its clutch. If you set the throttle to 2-3,000rpm and then release the clutch, you're going to wear out the two plates in the clutch assembly that come togeter and connect the engine to the transmission. With extended driving with setting the throttle first, you'll have to replace the clutch between 1-150,000 kilometres. Always best to get to the friction point, apply the throttle and get the clutch out as quickly as possible. See this video for more details: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q4AW_1hz6Rg&list=PL0x-bChcUvwE4covDy04Sre8cPPb-q4HL&t=6s&index=3 If there is anything further we can do, drop us a note. Always happy to help. All the best, Cheers Rick.

* hill start with parking brake especially in congestion is not possible, it's better to practice with your way.
> Suspect some drivers in the UK may disagree with you. They use the handbrake all the time; not just for hill starts. I think it is usually determined by the driving culture. The method I use is what I'm familiar with. If I had been taught the other method I might do that, because after you do it a couple of times it's not too hard. And the newer standard vehicles are really easy to get going on hills - relatively speaking of course. If there is anything further we can do, drop us a note. Always happy to help. All the best, Cheers Rick.

Your no handbrake hill start method may not work when the road is wet would it?
> Both methods are going to work for the hill start. You may spin the tires, which is what you want to get the vehicle going. And it is going to depend on how steep the hill is too. But you need to get the clutch out as quickly as possible to avoid burning out the clutch.

i noticed you don't use the heel to control the biting point is this the right way to do it?
> If you can place your heel on the floor & use your toes or the ball of your foot you’ll have more control of the clutch.

Car lights:
Headlights. There are two types of headlights—low beam and high beam. These lights allow the driver to see the roadway in the dark, while also signaling to other motorists that a car is present. Low beams provide a light distribution to give adequate forward and lateral illumination without blinding other road users with excessive glare. High beams provide an intense, center-weighted distribution of light with no particular control of glare and should only be used when there are no visible cars in front of you (coming or going).
Tail lights. Tail lights are required to produce only red light at the rear of the vehicle and are wired such that they are lit whenever the headlights are on. This helps drivers who are traveling behind you to recognize that you’re there and how far ahead you are.
Daytime running lights. These lights are located in both the front and rear of the car and generally turn on automatically; although in some cars you do have an option to turn them off. They are designed to make you more visible to other vehicles, but some drivers find them distracting in oncoming cars.
Fog lights. Located near the headlights, these lights and are generally mounted low in order to prevent the light from refracting on the fog and glaring back toward you (the driver). These should only be used during fog when normal headlights are not effective.
Signal lights. Also known as turn signals or “blinkers” these are located in the front and back of the car, beside the head and tail lights. When activated, they indicate to other drivers that you’ll soon be turning (in the indicated direction of the signal) and will most likely be slowing down to do so.
Brake lights. Located to the side of your rear lights, they signal drivers that you’re slowing down or stopping. Since they’re only activated when you apply the brakes you don’t need to worry about misusing them. However, you do have to make sure they are properly maintained and do not burn out.
Hazard lights. Also known as flashers, they are located in the front and back of the vehicle. When turned on they admit a flashing signal to warn other drivers that you’re experiencing a problem, are in distress, or warning of an immediate danger (rocks in the road, slow funeral procession). They should only be used as warnings of distress or traffic problems—never as stop signal or illegal parking permit.
Driving lamps. These are located inside the cab of your vehicle and are used to brighten the cab for the passenger or driver to safely check maps or directions, or locate items in the dark. They should never be used for long periods.

quick clutch with high rev => skid
quick clutch with low revs => stall

anti-lock braking system (ABS) is a safety anti-skid braking system used on aircraft and on land vehicles, such as cars, motorcycles, trucks and buses.[1] ABS operates by preventing the wheels from locking up during braking, thereby maintaining tractive contact with the road surface.
ABS is an automated system that uses the principles of threshold braking and cadence braking which were once practised by skilful drivers with earlier non-ABS braking systems. ABS operates at a very much faster rate and more effectively than most drivers could manage. Although ABS generally offers improved vehicle control and decreases stopping distances on dry and slippery surfaces, on loose gravel or snow-covered surfaces, ABS may significantly increase braking distance, while still improving steering control.[2][3][4] Since ABS was introduced in production vehicles, such systems have become increasingly sophisticated and effective. Modern versions may only prevent wheel lock under braking, but may also alter the front-to-rear brake bias. This latter function, depending on its specific capabilities and implementation, is known variously as electronic brakeforce distribution, traction control system, emergency brake assist, or electronic stability control (ESC).

The anti-lock braking system was created to keep the wheels from skidding when you decelerate quickly or abruptly. Once the ABS becomes engaged, you not only stop faster, you’re able to steer while you stop. So how does the ABS know when a wheel is about to lock up? There are 4 components your vehicle’s ABS - the speed sensors, valves, pump and controller. The controller is continuously tracking the speed sensors looking for unordinary or rapid decelerations, like when a wheel locks up. When this happens, the controller reduces the hydraulic pressure to the brakes. The hydraulic pressure will continue to be reduced until the controller notices an acceleration. This permits the tires to decelerate at the same rate as the car or truck. If you’ve ever felt a “pulsing” sensation when you applied your anti-lock brakes hard, you were experiencing the ABS at work.
What is the ABS Warning Light communicating?
With so many of lights on the car dashboard, it can get a little confusing when one comes on. Listed here are answers to some common questions about the ABS warning light.
What is the ABS warning light? When you turn the key in the ignition to start your automobile, the computer for the anti-lock braking system performs a self test. You’ll see the light illuminate briefly, and if the system is operating properly, it will go out. If the computer finds a problem (e.g. a hydraulic pump or valve isn’t responding), the warning light will stay on. If this happens, you should bring your vehicle in to have the anti-lock braking system evaluated.
Exactly what does it mean when the ABS warning light turns on while I’m driving? If the ABS light illuminates while you’re driving, it signifies a problem with the anti-lock braking system - it’s not functioning. When this occurs, you are still able to utilize your brakes, but without the added benefit of the anti-lock feature. In many instances, the light will turn off the next time you start your car. If, after it cycles through its self test, the light remains on, it is best to schedule an appointment with Trojan Auto Care, in Troy, OH. We’ll check the computer and perform a diagnostic to find out what is causing the issue.
Is it safe to operate my vehicle when the ABS warning light is illuminated? Yes, your automobile is safe to drive; however, you should have us look it over if the light stays on. It’s also important to note that if both the ABS and Brake System warning lights come on at the same time while you’re driving, you must stop your car or truck as quickly and safely as you can and call for a tow.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ASp_OTZ5fN8
Go easy on the brakes when slowing down, in racing situations you'll want to stop as quickly as possible, for everyday driving there's no need to constantly exercise those big brakes, when able, lift off the gas sooner and coasting gear as far as you can, this leaves extra room in front of you to respond to emergencies and it also helps save you fuel.
The next time you're about to pull out in front of a car take a second look back, perhaps you have just enough space to make the turn.

In early-2000 when I was living in Australia I was driving coaches for Greyhound and in the early morning it was dark and I was riding my bicycle on the way to work.
I made the mistake of getting up beside one of my colleagues and another coach--yes a Greyhound bus--I was on my bicycle went through the intersection.
The intersection was kind of an odd intersection where it kind of jogged as you went through the intersection.
And my colleagues saw somebody else on the other side of the road and pulled over to the curb.
The bus hit me on the shoulder on my bicycle and I don't remember anything much after that except looking up from the sidewalk when I was on my belly flat down. And I watched the rear wheels of the bus go over my bicycle.
And the reason I tell that story is because in the aftermath of that it took me some time to get back on my bicycle. And I knew that I had to get back on my bicycle or I probably wouldn't get back on.

Getting lost can create a lot of frustration and a lot of angst.

Most important, driving is a social activity, there is peer pressure and honking gives anxiety. Focus on what you are doing since there is pressure put on you by other drivers, quieten that negative voice in your head and ask people in the car to talk less. If you get into a situation you can't handle, stop and take a break, put the parking lights on, get out if needed, and then go on.Ignore them honking etc.

There's lots of peer pressure on the roadway from other drivers for you not to impede traffic.
Other drivers pressure you to not drive too slow.
If so they're going to be honking at you and those types of things.
And that can create a lot of angst and a lot of fear and a lot of anxiety around driving.
This pressure put on you by other drivers to not impede traffic.
And sometimes you will get pressured to proceed at an intersection when you shouldn't be going.
So you have to focus on what you're doing.
And this comes back to quieting that little voice in your head and knowing that what you're doing is driving safe.
“I am being cautious and I am going when I am comfortable to go.”
Because if you get pressured by other drivers, you could risk getting into a crash and you don't want to risk getting into a crash because you got pressured by other drives to go.
Say for example, on a left-hand turn you proceed when you shouldn't because the space is inadequate.
As well, if you get into a situation that you can't handle, simply stop the vehicle.
It doesn't matter - just stop the vehicle.
Let the other road users clear out.
And when the other road users clear out, then proceed.
And finally if you get your anxiety scale from 1 to 10 - 10 being the most anxious or just going to have a panic attack, simply stop and take a break.
Pull the vehicle over to the side of the road.
It doesn't matter where it is.
Put your four-way flashes on, get out of the vehicle.
Do whatever you need to do to calm yourself down.
Take a break and then get back into the vehicle.
Do not push forward through a panic attack and have a panic attack when you're driving.
If you need to take a break, take a break.
If you need to stop because the situation is overwhelming; you get into a situation that you can't handle, simply stop the vehicle.
Let the other road users clear out and then proceed.
Even if they're honking and those types of things.
As I said, focus on what you're doing.
It's the most important tip in learning how to drive and reduce fear in and anxiety around this activity.

Stopping with the clutch in is WRONG, as much as putting the car in neutral and hit the brakes. You can downshift without necessarily have to rev match, considering that on the road you're not going for the fastest time but for safety.

stop manual transmission:
brake, when tachometer dropped to 1000rpm(for gas/petrol engine, 600~700rpm for diesel engine), then clutch in.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ec34hbWaRgE
When driving a manual transmission, downshifting to slow the vehicle could cause damage.
Historically we downshifted manual transmissions because brakes were unreliable. This fallibility of brakes persisted well into the 1960s. At that time, automotive manufacturers implemented dual braking systems. These systems created two independent sub-systems; therefore, if one system failed, the other would continue to work normally. As well, if the entire system failed, the parking brake served as yet another failsafe.
On slippery conditions, skid pad tests have shown that rear-wheel lock up can be potentially dangerous. Thus, for riders and other drivers, if the rear wheel lock up on slippery roads, a driver or rider could potentially lose control of his/her vehicle and risk a crash.
Finally, why would drivers use a $15,000 drivetrain to save $400 brakes? This has been the dominate theme in downshifting a manual transmission for the purposes of slowing the vehicle - save the brakes! Relatively speaking brakes are inexpensive compared to a clutch or other drive train components; therefore, use the brakes.
> As a 43 year veteran long haul driver who only drives cars with manual transmissions ( I hate automatics!)  I can truthfully say that your driving instruction here is a breath of fresh air.  I just watched a bunch of videos of dudes trying to show their girl friends how to drive a stick, and it was pathetic.  Driving a stick is a lost art!  And, no I do not downshift either whether it is in my six speed car or an 18 speed Pete.  I also rarely rev my car (unless I'm in a real big hurry)  past 3000 RPM.  We run our trucks up to about 1600 RPM to shift. Also I noticed so many people stop with their clutch. As you say, you don't clutch while stopping, until the RPM is close to idle.  If you drive correctly your clutch (and your engine!) can last the life of the car.

Hi there. Not to be rude or anything as I love your videos, just mentioning a slight error, in a lower gear your vehicle produces more torque, as you upshift your car produces less torque meaning you don't overcome the friction of the wheels to spin them, at 5:46 you said you stop spinning the tires because you have more torque in a higher gear but that isn't accurate, I wish you all the best! Keep up the good videos!
> Thank you for your comment and tremendous feedback which allows me to make an amendment. You know what I was thinking - the engine produces more torque, but as you said, less torque is delivered to the wheels in higher gears. If there is anything further we can do, drop us a note. Always happy to help. All the best, Cheers Rick.

Ko Li: I do have a slight different point of view. I've only been driving manual daily for 20 years, through rain and snow, in FF(Civic), FR(BRZ), MR(Cayman S), AWD(440i), and 4WD(Sidekick). What I found is whether I'm in the proper gear when I'm slowing down for a complete stop, or in preparation for cornering,  I have more control of the overall handling of the car. In fact, I think that downshifting, rev matching, and heel toe, should be part of the daily driving routine for manual driver so that it becomes part of your reflex to do so. The problem I see here is, let's say you are driving in a highway in 6th gear, there's another car cut in front you forcing you to brake slow down. When it's time for you to pick up the speed, you'll freeze at least a second or two to either look at the speedometer to check your speed, or worst, to look down at the gear to see which gear you are at at that moment, in order to find the proper gear to speed up. On the other hand, every time when something like that happen to me. I just automatically heel toe downshift to match up the speed of the obstruction vehicle. When it's time for me to speed up, all i need to do is to step on the gas and go. That way I'm in 100% control of the car no matter what's going on around me while I'm driving.

Here is a clip from a modern engineer point of view. If downshift is done properly, there should not be any wear to the clutch. https://youtu.be/sNbMXJ2_yqU

I'm just a guy rather drive a manual Civic than a M dual clutch M4. I'm always interested to find a better way to improve my driving skill. Hopefully you can give me some advise about this. Thanks.
> Hi Ko Li - thank you for your detailed and informative comment. The heel-toe and rev matching techniques are used in racing to go around corners at higher speeds than what the car is designed to do. I approach downshifting from the perspective of the "lazy truck driver." The goal of driving a commercial vehicle is to keep the vehicle moving and to shift as few gears as possible. The irony is that you have to shift gears to keep the vehicle moving - or at least accelerate. And the other point is that downshifting to slow the vehicle uses fuel, therefore it's not economical. Also, you're not going to be able to rev match perfectly; therefore you're using a $15,000 drivetrain to save $400 brakes. Since I'm a lazy truck driver, I just use the brakes to slow and when I get to the lower speed I just shift to the appropriate gear and proceed. If there is anything further we can do, drop us a note. Always happy to help. All the best, Cheers Rick.

Clutch is wonderful invention. You can do many thing with it,not only changing gears.In snow driving,you can and must use clutch to maintain full control of you car. Since i live in Serbia,were winters can be pretty bad , i learned how to drive in that conditions.
For safe driving on snow you need few things:
1. front wheel drive ,since rear wheel drive is suicidal (but if you still do that ,it is best to put one or two 50 kg bags with cement in the back ,just to have better traction)
2. good winter tires
3. some experience 
When you drive on snow you must avoid to use hard breaking ,instead you must use lower gears and clutch  to maintain and lower your speed and very,very light tapping on brake.Driving on snow is very hard and needs much concentration especially if there is ice on the road with snow,which is always ,but you alway have more control with stick than with automatic.
> I agree that front wheel drive standard allows for more control when driving on the snow and ice. And you are correct that experience and practice will make you a better driver. You have some great information, and your comments are valuable.


It depends on what you're driving.  With a modern car and anti-lock brakes, sure, just use the brakes.  With something older you want to use the rear wheels for braking on slippery surfaces.  Yes, if you break traction on the rear wheels you can lose control, but not nearly as badly as breaking traction with your front wheels.  Break out the rear wheels and you'll fishtail, but can still maintain at least some control of the general direction you're going.  Break out the front wheels by using your brakes and you become a ballistic object controlled only by the slope of the road and whatever you bounce off of.  Incidentally, while the dual system brakes help reliability if something starts leaking, most of the improvements in brake reliability are due to better pad materials that don't abruptly stop working when subjected to thermal stress.  So even old vehicles are a lot safer now as long as they've had their pads replaced.

Also there is a small amount of additional safety if you downshift, not because your brakes are likely to fail, but because if you keep the vehicle in an appropriate gear for your speed you can accelerate quickly if you need to get out of the way of something.  The way you were driving, there was a period of 20-30 seconds at each stop where you would have had to shift before you could apply acceleration.  If there's nowhere ahead you can safely go, then it doesn't matter, but if there is, then it can be worth it.  My father has avoided a couple of accidents because his car was still in an appropriate gear as he was slowing to a stop and he could dodge the fools who took their right-hand turn a little wide by goosing his vehicle around the corner.  

Automatic transmissions don't hold back as well as manual transmissions because the hydraulic torque converter can't exert more than one atmosphere of backward pressure.  (You'll find the same issue on the occasional manual-with-torque-converter large truck.)  They can still hold back a significant amount, but expect the braking force to cut out suddenly as the speed nears idle.  You do have to be extremely careful if trying to use one for rear-wheel-only braking because you don't actually have direct control over when it shifts and you really can't match the road speed, so it tends to be more abrupt.  But, again, if you don't have anti-lock brakes, turning your car into a fishtailing, drag-stabilized dart is much preferable to putting it into a flat spin.  Also, it can be useful to shift an automatic manually when starting out on bad traction surfaces.  If you leave it automatic and a wheel slips and you don't have a limited-slip differential, you can end up with the transmission shifting up and spinning the wheel at even higher speed, requiring you to use the brakes to stop it and get it back in traction and somehow do that without breaking out the other wheels.  If you've forced it into a low gear, then just feathering the throttle is often sufficient.

No offence, but the wheels slipping when in low gear probably has more to do with the driver being in a hurry to get going than with what specific gear the transmission was in.
> Yes, technology is great - especially automotive technology. Vehicles are much better than they were even a quarter century ago. And a rear-wheel spin is often more complicated than we believe. Track tests on big semi-trucks have shown that rear wheel spin and lock-up is more dangerous to the driver than front wheel lock up. Now on a regular car, there is less weight, and not a trailer pushing. But because most of the weight of the engine is in the front--as well as the transmission--rear wheel spin and lockup is much more likely to cause the back end to come around more quickly. And when slowing down you have a point about being in the right gear, but I would also stress the point that a driver should always check the mirror before slowing to ensure the vehicle behind too is going to come to a stop. Finally, the spinning in the video was because there was ice--and yes, a combination of too much throttle--but those of us who are experienced are quickly going to adjust the primary controls. All the best my friend. Cheers Rick.
>> Rear-wheel spinout/lockup is definitely more complicated than one might assume without careful consideration, but it can be broken down into a few scenarios:

If you're applying deceleration with all four wheels and the rear ones lock up, the fact that the front wheels are significantly more powerful at braking and the weight of the engine is in the front will tend to spin the car as the front end tries to stop and the back end tries to keep going.  The only way to keep control is to take the pressure off the front wheels.

If you're going around a curve, whether accelerating or decelerating, your rear wheels will end up outside the arc of your front wheels instead of inside.  Whether this is a problem or not will come down to how fast you are going and your rate of delta-V as that controls how far outside the arc your rear wheels will swing.  As long as it's not wide enough to exceed the turning limits of your front wheels you should be able to recover, and may even be able to just continue the turn if your front wheels have sufficient traction.  Beware of hitting things with the rear end of your vehicle that's sticking out on the opposite side from what you expect.  Also beware of over-correcting as you steer, you can easily get the back end whipping around like a fly fishing line adding energy with each pass until you exceed your turning arc and spin out.  

If you're applying braking with only the rear wheels, your car starts to behave like an oversized lawn dart.  The drag on only the rear wheels coupled with the majority of the weight being in the front will tend to point the car in its direction of travel, all other things being equal.  If you break out the rear wheels, it will become much less stable, but the drag will still be primarily from the rear, so the car will still tend to nose into whatever direction it's headed.  You can still steer left and right, but be mindful that if you turn too hard you'll put yourself into the second situation, and if you try to apply braking with your front wheels you'll put yourself into the first scenario.

If you're accelerating with just the rear wheels and spin them out, it's similar to braking with all four wheels, only most of the energy involved is under your direct control so it's easy to get out of as long as you don't wait too long.  Of course "too long" can be pretty quick in slippery conditions...

If you're accelerating with the front wheels or both sets and you break out the rear, you end up similar to situation two or three depending on your rate of turn.  I think the difference between these last two is probably why frontwheel drive is commonly said to be easier for the novice to handle in the snow.  You have fewer manoeuvring options, but the ones you do have are harder to screw up when accelerating and almost everybody has anti-lock brakes these days.

All this assumes you don't have a trailer.   Trailers can turn the whole thing into an awful mess if you break traction with any of your wheels.
>>> Hi Laurence Perkins - apologies for the late response. That is great information. And you are correct - a trailer throws a spanner into the works! The proper speed and power to the wheels and the whole thing should be good through the turn. All the best, Cheers Rick.

I never down shift in city traffic.
I only down shift when I feel the need for more control with the throttle, which helps getting through narrow corners faster.
> Yes, downshifting is a thing of the past. It is no longer needed because brakes are reliable and the drive train is expensive.

best way to stop a manual car:
1. Assuming a modern car of typical size with a 5 speed gearbox - For a normal stop such as slowing to stop at traffic lights from 30/40 mph:

brake gently. This is important, it begins deceleration and shows a brake light to the rear of your car.
Check your engine speed. If the engine speed is close to idle speed then you can downshift without releasing the brake. Don’t bother shifting from 2nd to 1st, you won’t be in gear long enough for it to make any difference.
As you get close to stopping, push the clutch in and stop on the brake. Put the gearbox in neutral, handbrake on, release the footbrake and clutch and wait for the lights to change.
For a normal stop from high speed - like leaving a motorway and getting to a junction at 70mph in top gear:

Brake steadily and shift down to 4th. Again, braking first is important as it shows a brake light to traffic behind you. Changing down assists braking with engine pumping losses, making for smoother and more controlled braking.
As your speed decreases, change down through the gears. You could save on workload by block shifting from 4th to 2nd as you get below about 40ph. Stop finally as (3) above.
For an emergency stop from any speed: ABS equipped vehicles

brake hard and ignore all your back seat crap flying at the windscreen. You will be surprised at the amount of G a very ordinary car can produce under emergency braking.
As your speed approaches zero push the clutch in to prevent the engine stalling, if you can - Stopping is more important, concentrate on that. Don’t bother downshifting. Just stop.
As soon as you are stopped, assess where you are and what is around you - and what to do next - You may need to re-engage 1st gear and get away from where you are if there is a threat to your safety, such as the angry drunken mob you braked for in the first place.
Variation for non - ABS vehicles

Brake hard by pushing the brake in smartly but progressively harder, this will allow a short time for the vehicles front springs to compress, allowing more braking effort to be applied without skidding.
If the front wheels slip release the brake slightly and re-apply firmly. You’ll know if they slip because the steering will become light and indistinct, deceleration will reduce suddenly and on a dry road, you’ll near the tyres shriek. releasing and reapplying the brake is called cadence braking and it is exactly what ABS does, much better, faster and for each individual wheel.
as (3) above.
Why change down while slowing to stop? Two reasons.

It makes for smoother deceleration and less brake heating although this is much less of a problem than in the 1950s. Modern cars have good brakes, and discs/pads are far better than they were.
It maintains a state of readiness, and thus a far higher margin of safety in case you have to suddenly do something else, like get safely around a car that suddenly loses a wheel or changes lane without looking, or if the lights you’re going to change and you need to just keep going. If you have to cope with any of these situations and you are slowing on the brake with the clutch disengaged, you’ll be much less able to avoid an accident or maintain a smooth drive.
Close ratio or 6 speed gearboxes; your results may vary but see what works best to keep it all smooth, controlled and above all, as safe as possible.

2. The best way to stop any modern vehicle that is functioning correctly is with the brakes.

Normally, you should leave a manual transmission in the gear it is in until the engine speed reduces to near idle speed, and then depress the clutch to avoid a stall.

It would be inadvisable to depress the clutch at the same time as the brake pedal when you are just beginning to slow down. This would remove the beneficial engine braking effect (and may reduce braking power available from the servo).

On a long descent it may be wise to choose a lower gear to assist with controlling speed.

Idle speed (or idle) is the rotational speed an engine runs at when the engine is idling, that is, when the engine is uncoupled from the drivetrain and the throttle pedal is not depressed. In combustion engines, idle speed is generally measured in revolutions per minute (rpm) of the crankshaft. At idle speed, the engine generates enough power to run reasonably smoothly and operate its ancillaries (water pump, alternator, and, if equipped, other accessories such as power steering), but usually not enough to perform useful work, such as moving an automobile.
For a passenger car engine, idle speed is customarily between 600 and 1000 rpm. For medium and heavy duty trucks, it is approximately 600 rpm. For many single-cylinder motorcycle engines, idle speed is set between 1200 and 1500 rpm. Two-cylinder motorcycle engines are often set around 1000 rpm.

http://www.vocabulary.cl/Advanced/Car_Parts.htm
Bonnet: The metal lid at the front of the car that covers the motor. It is called the Hood in United States.
Black plastic piece attached to the front of the bonnet: bug deflector, which is designed to change the airflow over the hood and deflect bugs away from the windshield. These are also helpful if you can't see the end of the bonnet (hood) for parking, it's a good indicator to how much space you have when parking.

科三灯光模拟
1:夜间在没有路灯照明不良条件下行驶，第一句（近光）
2:进入照明良好道路（近光）
3:夜间超越前方车辆（闪三下）
4:前方通过路口（近光）
5:进入照明不良道路（远光）
6:在路边临时停车（关大灯，向后拧一下）
7:通过急弯，坡路，拱桥，人行横道（闪三下）
8:同方向进距离跟车行驶（近光）
9:夜间与机动车会车（进光）

10:模拟夜间考试完成，请关闭所有灯光。
注意事项
1:灯光第一项，第十项必考。
2:变道打转向必须3秒以上可以动方向盘。
3:通过，学校，人行横道，路口，公共汽车站，必须20迈以下 。
4:直线行驶必须3档，30迈以上。

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Iy8YyvJ9d1M
Tips for Quicker Shifting
You shouldn't put pressure on your shifter for extended periods of time. It will wear out the shift forks and then you get a sloppy transmission, and miss shifts. Also if you're very fluid with your "one motion" of release clutch, shift, engage clutch using your pressure method isn't faster. Also, speed shifting like that is bad for your syncros/gears. They have to bring the next gear to the speed of your engine when you shift, hence why they are called a syncro. the edges of the teeth will chip also. The shift forks can also bend if you use too much force when you change gears. which happens because you're trying to shift quickly, so you end up just muscling it into the next gear. Im not saying you're doing that, But this is a how to video" so im speaking about people in general using this technique.  I prefer the granny shift method because it makes the transmission last longer and is a less jerky shift. but, you say its not as fast of a shift. It can be pretty close to as quick as you if you do it right. You have to have the right parts. In my car i have a 8lb. flywheel (stock is 18 in my car) and light weight clutch assembly. (not sure how much lighter the assembly is, but its noticeable in your hands) my rpms will lower the exact amount i need for an up shift very quickly. about 2 tenths of a second. Now i know your way is slightly faster, but my way will make my transmission last a lot longer. not to mention handle more power because im being easier on the gears. it also feels smoother. If these are things you don't care about, then go ahead. It is indeed an impressively fast shift. And with that subi, it sounds bad ass.

just one last thing i thought i should mention, flat foot shifting isn't just not releasing the gas. thats what people who don't know what they're doing call it, or try to do. To properly flat foot shift it has to be setup into the ecu and a switch has to be put on the clutch so when you push in the clutch it cuts the ignition for set amount of time. its basically the same as releasing the gas, but the computer does it for you. 1 less thing you have to do in your "one motion" 

i had a system similar to this on my dirt bike when i was racing. except the switch wasn't on the clutch, it was on the shifter. when i went to shift it would cut the ignition for a split second and allow it to go into the next gear very quickly. You could stay pinned while you shifted. it helped with big triples and such that didn't have a lot of run up out of corners, i also got hole-shots a lot more after getting that. i think i had a vortex ignition. 

I did enjoy watching your video, good job narrating it. We are all here for the love of cars and driving fast. Keep it up. Any knowledge Ive gotten from experiences i like to pass on. My current road race car has 250k miles on the original transmission, from using my technique and ill assure you i haven't lost a race because of my shifting time. I can also clutch-less shift it if i want to, and have done so all day at a track day just because i can.
> You press the clutch and then you shift there you can do it fast, but at some point you have to stop trying to make it faster.. if you want instant shifts go PDK. its OK to take half a second, you dont need to shift in 1/4 second... this boy is totally wrong and you can tell he is not a good driver..
the best way to learn how to shift is to do it in a vintage car, once you can manage not braking the gearbox every 6 months, then you´ve learned... he will sell his sti with 80k miles with a gearbox about to explode.
> Don't put pressure on shift knob, either by the way he said or by just resting your hand on your shifter. if you're putting pressure on it, the shift fork is touching the engagement ring. which is metal on metal. there isn't a wear ring or anything. the engagement  ring spins and the shift fork stays in place so they both wear when there is pressure pushing the shift fork in either direction. now putting presume on like he says may be ok if you only do it a second before you have to ahift. that isn't much time. but  to do it for extended amount of time will cause excessive wear. like I said before, a well timed shift does not need that extra little step. just be more fluid. release clutch, move gear selector, engage clutch.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uAavYOieQ8A
What I find scary is how many people (especially those of the more beautiful gender :))) ) never waste a thought on what is going on with their car when they shift gears, and thus never realize that they can, and should, shift dynamically, depending on the traffic situation, and never find out that its actually possible and recommendable to perform an upshift in less than five seconds, or that it might be a good idea to exceed 3000 rpm and half-throttle once in a while, e.g. when entering a motorway... Resulting in gazillions of barrels of wasted fuel every day, notoriously bad traffic flow in cities and on motorways anywhere in the world and so many other unpleasant effects....
People clearly need to be better educated about the technical details of cars and driving. Seems to me like either the authorities dont want people to be educated, or they think people are too dumb to care. Uninformed consumers = good consumers.

http://www.sdt.com.au/safedrive-directory-CHANGINGGEARS.htm
1. Can you go from 2nd/3rd/4th/5th gear and straight into neutral or do you have to go through them all? Can I go from 5th to 2nd/1st?

Yes it is recommended that in a modern manual transmission you can skip gears when going up or down. For example; when accelerating you can if required change-up from 1st to 3rd, though 3rd gear may labour due to low engine revs. Alternatively when approaching a corner you may change from 4th or 5th down to 2nd without using the gears in between. Care needs to be exhibited to ensure you have the right speed for the gear. Many untrained drivers have a phobia about using the brakes (thinking the brake lights are a sign of weakness) and persist in the bad habit of using the gears to slow the car down. Gears are for going, brakes for slowing. As such under brakes you can skip down gears to get the most appropriate gear for the situation, but don't use the gear selection itself to slow the car. Also be careful not to gear down from 5th to 2nd at high speed or with any lateral load on the vehicle and step off the clutch in 2nd, as the car could enter into a skid.

2. If your car is rolling down a hill in neutral and it picks up speed to say 20mph, can you skip a gear? Go directly into 2nd?

Yes you can, but why would you roll down a hill in neutral? If you must roll down a hill do so in a gear with your foot depressing the clutch. This way if the car gets up to much speed (with cold brakes) you can let off the clutch to get some retardation from the gears. Going downhill is the only time gears can be used to help retard the car as brakes used too much can overheat.

3. I heard some cars can get up to 50mph on 1st gear before needing to shift to 2nd. Does this mean that you rarely have to shift gears while driving to stay within speed limits? 50mph is more than fast enough for the city. Wouldn't you be in 1st gear most of the time and have no need to go into 2nd except maybe on the freeway. 

Yes some gears can get to high speed in first gear. But you would not drive around all the time in first as the engine would be carrying high revs allot, leading to poor fuel consumption, high engine temperature, increased fluid usage and increased engine component wear. The noise in the vehicle cabin would also be tiring. If you were driving at high speed in first and stepped quickly of the accelerator the effect would unsettle the car potentially leading to a skid. If for example you were cornering with high revs in 1st gear there would be weight transfer to the rear of the vehicle (due to acceleration) and by quickly letting off the pedal, the revs would drop rapidly and the weight would transfer to the front of the vehicle leaving the rear un-weighted. In a corner this can produce a tail-slide even in a front-wheel drive car. This effect is known as Lift-Off Oversteer Skidding.

4. Does it matter if it's a 4/5/6-speed gearbox? The Corvettes have a 6-speed gearbox and the new Porsche Carrera GT has a 4-speed.  What does the amount of gears have in relation to speed and acceleration. Is it better to have more?

The gearbox ratios in family cars are alot different to performance cars and racing cars. In a family car 1st gear is for driving up steep hills, driveways, towing boats up a boat ramp. 2nd/3rd/4th are for suburban driving. 5th gear is usually an overdrive gear that allows for economical motoring at freeway speeds but no greater acceleration. Therefore overtaking in 5th gear is not recommended as it takes longer and increases the risk of a head on collision. In a Porsche or similar performance cars the gear ratios are slightly different. In a performance car with a 6 speed gearbox, 5th gear is also used for acceleration. In many forms of motorsport the gear ratios and diff ratios are set for each track depending on its layout. The aim is to keep the race car in the meaty part of the torque curve to allow better performance. With most family cars a driver redlining each gear to achieve maximum acceleration is a fool. Best acceleration would be achieved by changing gears at the engine revs just past the maximum torque is achieved, depending on the next gear ratio. Drivers over-revving simply make more noise, wear more components and waste more fuel without achieving a performance gain.

5. When making sudden stops, should you be concerned about putting it into neutral so the car doesn't stall? Like if you're driving and someone jumps in front of you out of no where, should you worry about slamming on the brakes and stalling?  I would think in those cases, you wouldn't have enough time to hit the clutch, brake and put it in to neutral.

In a modern car with an electronic fuel injected engine and equipped with a catalytic converter in the exhaust system, when you take your foot off the accelerator does the engine revs on the tachometer drop slowly or instantly to idle? They drop slowly due to unburnt fuel being burnt and the process of the catalytic converter. Therefore in a emergency stop if you brake with no clutch depressed the engine revs and driving wheels are still connected resulting in the brakes trying to slow the car while the wheels still drive the car. Independent tests have found that braking and depressing the clutch as soon as possible can improve stopping distance by up to 10 yards at 55 mph. Don't worry about the gears, don't select neutral. But do depress the clutch.

6. If you roll down a hill in 1st gear but don't push the gas pedal or brake do you pick up speed? Say max mph for 1st gear is 15mph, will your speed accelerate pass 15mph?

How do you roll down a hill in first gear. If you park in first gear and use the park/hand brake. By letting off the park/hand brake the car will not move forward if it is in gear. Try parking your car on flat ground with it in 1st and pushing the car. It won't move.

7. When going down a hill and I don't want to go too fast, should I go down in 1st gear or neutral?

The general rule of thumb for going downhill is to use whatever gear your car needs to climb that hill. You will follow many untrained drivers down hills that have their brake lights always on. Chances are they are either driving a auto in D from dream (drive) or in too higher gear in a manual. The car wants to race away and they ride the brakes excessively. Select a lower gear so the gears help retard the car, if you need to slow, brake firmly and then come off the brakes to let them cool. Don't ride the brakes!

Best and Worst First Cars to Buy
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Pek0gOAla8A
Scotty’s Top DIY Tools:
1. Bluetooth Scan Tool: http://amzn.to/2nfvmaD
2. Cheap Scan Tool: https://amzn.to/2D8Tvae
3. Professional Socket Set: http://amzn.to/2Bzmccg 
4. Wrench Set: http://amzn.to/2kmBaOU
5. No Charging Required Car Jump Starter: https://amzn.to/2CthnUU
6. Battery Pack Car Jump Starter: http://amzn.to/2nrc6qR

⬇️Things used in this video:
1. Common Sense
2. 4k Camera: http://amzn.to/2C2uTMU
3. Mini Microphone: http://amzn.to/2newgV9
4. My computer for editing / uploading: http://amzn.to/2i2sKYz
5. Video editing software: http://amzn.to/2jv5Fhf
6. Thumbnail software: http://amzn.to/2k7tz6C

🛠Check out my Garage to see what I use every day and highly recommend:
https://www.amazon.com/shop/scottykilmer

Phil Mante
My recommendations for a first vehicle?
1 - '92 and up Honda civic.
According to people i've talked to, these are the easiest to wrench on. I read a comment somewhere that on the '92 to '95 model, a 10 inch, 12 inch, and a 14 inch wrench can take apart 90% of the car. Civics are also a lot of fun, even in their worst condition. My only honda so far was a '91 Civic DX special edition sedan, that i paid 500$ for as a winter beater. The kid i bought it off of didn't tell me the head gasket was broken, so the car overheated after the coolant bled out. It didn't live to see the end of winter, but I didn't care. It survived long enough.

2 - '88 - '98 Chevrolet C/K 1500 OR GMC Sierra 1500
Also very easy to wrench on, and if you have the 350 V8 engine, VERY EASY to get parts for in North America. Plus, these trucks are virtually indestructible. There's a reason you still see tons of these 20-30 year old trucks, some still in showroom condition. You want to get menial tasks done involving a truck, this is the truck you want. However, Consider that gas mileage and gas prices are very high so gas will eat up your budget harder than the insurance will. However the longevity of these vehicles will mean you won't be spending money on a new vehicle anytime soon.

3 - Pretty much Any Mazda B-series mini-truck.
Mini-trucks are practically cheating in the automotive world. These things are capable of doing any moving job for very little gas. My brother's first vehicle was an '89 Mazda b2200 and he drove that thing for a few years. He sold it to a guy in 100 mile house, BC (where he served in the RCMP) and when he left for Vancouver Island about 7 years later...the guy who bought his truck was STILL driving it.
You might point out that the Mazda B-series and the Ford Ranger are the same truck. Ford's earlier Rangers are good starters, but apparently the newer ones are meant to be disposable. Also, my mechanic discovered that around the year 2000, Ford stopped putting their trade-ins back on the lot, they began destroying them in order to keep backyard mechanics from getting parts easily, and forcing ford owners to buy new trucks. A dick move perhaps, but did ford need a bailout back in '08?

4 - Pretty much any Toyota Camry
Toyota's track record might be the best of any car manufacterer. The Camry is a solid sedan with one goal - Get you around, point A to Point B. If you don't care about what you drive and you only want something that's going to get you around and almost never breaks down, Get a Camry. Or a Corolla. My auntie, who doesn't know jack about cars, drove an '05 Corolla for a long time, and then bought an '05 Camry. To her it's the perfect car.

5 - Pretty much any Jeep Cherokee
You want to go 4-wheeling? Check. Want longevity? Check. Only have about 2 grand to spend? Check. Easy to fix and a large aftermarket for parts? You want the Jeep Cherokee model. these things are all over the place, and they can 4x4 pretty much anywhere. Also, there's lots of 20-30 year old ones still cruising the city streets, meaning these things can last a long time. However, since they're popular for 4-wheeling, odds are the previous owners have abused them. So make sure a good mechanic does a Pre-Purchase inspection so you don't get a cherokee that some guy drowned in a mud bog a few summers back.

How to do a 'heel & toe' gear change (racing downshift) | Auto Expert John Cadogan
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6CfduI-cRCk
John is combining two techniques here: double clutching, which is used to match the engine revs and gearbox input shaft revs, and heel toe downshifting, which is a way of staying on the brake into a corner while blipping the throttle to bring up engine revs to match the lower gear about to be engaged, so the clutch doesn't have to suddenly force your engine revs up, putting strain on your entire drive train,  and potentially causing loss of traction. 
Doing one or the other is straightforward, heel toe being the harder of the two, but combining them is a juggling act.

Ray Johnson: For those drivers that drive trucks that have the older style gearboxes as in crash box, this maneuver is it daily occurence and the reason to do it this way even with a synchro is the syncro does not disengage until you release the clutch so you can't just hold the clutch, while adding power because you've still got the old gear that you're coming from because you haven't disengaged the synchro.
> Liam Cooper: Ray Johnson, i must still be half asleep still. I agree with ur non sync/crash box statement but not the rest. The syncros work where ever the selector fork is moved into a gear. Doesnt matter if your on the clutch or double clutching. The moment you start moving the forks to select a gear (from returned neutral state) the syncro friction cups start to engauge then the syncro teeth then finally the selector ring (sleeve) can side across.
> Liam is correct about the function of the synchro clutch-cones being engaged by the selector sleeve, look it up and be surprised. 
What you aren't doing whilst holding down the clutch is increasing the RPM of the gearbox's Input Shaft, releasing the clutch before blipping the throttle brings the input shaft up to speed saving the Synchro clutch-cone on the next gear from doing that work. 
It's really sad that almost no one actually knows what a manual box looks like inside, Haynes manuals in the 70s and 80s used to include gearbox rebuilds ;-)

Truck drivers do NOT heel toe shift.  We have to double clutch, sure, but we release the brake in order to actuate the throttle when RPM matching on the downshift.

What is the benefit of double-clutching and spinning up the transmission in neutral?  Can't you rev-match with the clutch in for a faster downshift?
> the reason you need to rev match with the clutch engaged (=pedal NOT depressed) is because the engine needs to spin the input shaft inside the gbox to match the speed of the DRIVEN output shaft. (remember that the rolling car is still driving the wheels + driveshafts + diff + output shaft while it is coasting in neutral)

> I've done heel and toe since I first learnt to drive and raced cars for years. I've never bothered with the double declutch part. Seems to provide no advantage in speed or smoothness on a regular gearbox even at race pace, however it might be required on race oriented gearboxes like dog boxes, though I've never driven one myself to confirm that.

> "raced cars for years" ...and never used a dogbox, very strange indeed.  "Seems to provide no advantage in speed or smoothness on a regular gearbox even at race pace" ... aw come on man, seriously, if you have in fact raced any vehicle with a synchromesh gearbox and NOT double de-clutched then you would be replacing the synchromesh rings every race, and second and third gears every other race. Barreling into a corner at max braking and then releasing the clutch in second or third without DD is a great way to lock the drive wheels and ending up in the armco and out of the race.

> There’s absolutely no need to double clutch these days with a modern synchromesh gearbox. John probably learnt this technique in his younger years and now it’s just a habit. Truckies still use this technique with crash gearboxes but race cars drivers never do. It’s just an unnecessary extra process that slows the down change shift. If the synchros in your gearbox are badly worn the double clutching would be a benefit, but otherwise, it’s not necessary.

No need to double-declutch. That's the whole point of synchromesh. For those of us very used to driving constant mesh or even sliding gear transmissions, double-declutching was/Is second nature but frankly it just isn't needed with modern transmission. By all means blip the throttle to synchronise the revs, but let the gearbox synchro do its job.
Do it if you enjoy doing it but it just isn't necessary. 
Skilled drivers, once they get moving, don't really need to use the clutch at all, much less double-declutch. Try it. It's very satisfying, but another archaic skill that is rather unnecessary and superfluous these days.

https://www.quora.com/If-stopping-at-a-red-light-when-driving-a-manual-shift-car-are-you-supposed-to-put-the-car-in-neutral-and-let-out-on-the-clutch-while-waiting-for-the-light-to-change-Alternatively-keep-clutch-pushed-down-and-car-in-1st-gear
If stopping at a red light when driving a manual shift car, are you supposed to put the car in neutral and let out on the clutch while waiting for the light to change? Alternatively, keep clutch pushed down and car in 1st gear?
I don’t know if there are many types of clutches, but yes, I would releave the pressure on the clutch, but I keep my foot on the brake. I do not use the handbrake as it also works on a cable that will wear out in time. The cable cannot be visibly checked when the car is being serviced.
If you hold down the clutch, and you sneeze, you may jump forward and hit someone.
There are countries where you must use the hand brake at every stop light, I think South Africa is one.
Rather than sit at a light with the clutch engaged, shift to neutral and hold your foot on the brake.

incline?
decline?
Since your questions asks, “…are you supposed to…”, I’ll answer the way my father taught me; I put the car in neutral and release the clutch. My dad worked on cars and motorcycles and he taught me it was, “bad” to keep the clutch engaged(wrong?! disengaged?) for any more than a few seconds, like when at a light. I didn’t ask for specifics, but I follow his advice at the majority of lights where I come to a complete stop. If I’m at a light with an incline, I also engage the parking brake prior to pulling away so that I don’t drift backwards as I lift off of the clutch. However, I should mention that I pay strict attention to the light so that I don’t hinder the drivers behind me when it turns green.
Also, unless I’ve parked on a steep incline, I always put my car in neutral and engage the parking brake when parking instead of putting it in 1st gear like I’ve seen many others do.
If I expect to stand at the light for more than a couple of seconds, I will pull on the handbrake and put in neutral (in that order).
Putting your car in gear, finding your biting point, releasing the handbrake and letting go the clutch the rest of the way only takes a fraction of a second with practice.
And if there is one thing you practice whilst driving a manual car, it is just that.
One word of caution, if you are on an incline or decline, always put on your handbrake unless you are experienced enough to “hang” on your clutch without rolling forward/backward.

revs approach idle (1000-1500rpm), 1k-1500 (lower on diesels)
What's the proper way to stop in a manual car?
Advice has varied over the years, but one thing that's common is a desire to keep the driveline engaged as much as possible - do not go to neutral and try to avoid sitting with the clutch down, as a bad release could unstabilize the vehicle. The other thing is to be intelligent about the situation, and here's my take on that:
If you are coming to a certain stop (say, a long line of cars behind a red light) then there is no point in shifting at all as you slow. Brake, without pressing the clutch, until revs approach idle (1000-1500rpm). At this point, depress the clutch, come to a complete stop, select first, handbrake if you swing that way (I do), etc. I always engage and release the clutch in neutral on my way through to first, but that's probably just habit from growing up on transmissions with unsynchronized first gears.
If you are coming to a point where you need to be in the proper gear to move off quickly, say a yield or a roundabout - estimate what gear you will need to be in for the task and block shift down to it if feasible. Usually I'll block shift into 3rd from anywhere from 4th-6th as I approach a corner or area of possible traffic contention, and only drop to 2nd from 3rd if necessary. Don't sit with the clutch down, let the driveline engage - this will also help make downshifts easier. If you end up stopping, just brake in whatever gear you're in until you reach 1k-1500 (lower on diesels) and then depress the clutch pedal. Into 1st, etc.
That's what I took away from my UK and German lessons, anyway. When I took lessons in the USA we were advised to shift to every gear as we went down regardless, but it was in San Francisco a long time ago and I can kind of see why. Especially with drum brakes on those hills.

You don't press on the clutch as a part of "braking" so much as to simply keep the engine from stalling. Whatever approach you use for gear selection during braking, keep the driveline engaged for as long as is easily done.

You only need to use the clutch decelerating when downshifting or coming to a stop. If you're going from 75-65, you can just brake. However, if you were to try to come to a stop in 6th gear without pressing the clutch, then the rpms would go way down and the car would eventually stall. Essentially, the gear ratio would not be providing the right amount of power to the wheels.
> So the rpms drop too fast if you're in a higher gear and brake hard? As opposed to the rpms gently getting lower because you gear down?
>> When you're downshifting, the rpms will go down as you brake in let's say 5th gear. When you shift into 4th gear, the rpms will go back up due to the change in ratio, but go down again as you continue to brake. Downshifting allows for you to maintain rpms that are not too high and not too low. If you brake too much in a higher gear without using the clutch, then the rpms would get too low and the vehicle would stall.
>> right, because at the same time you're technically in Neutral which would give you the chance to put it in the appropriate gear to match the current speed of the vehicle. So my question is if the rpms get too low the car stalls whether you're in 3rd or 5th?
>> Exactly! High rpms is when you shift up, too high and you'll redline, low rpms you downshift, or if too low you stall.
>> So what happens if I'm in fourth gear and i come to a complete stop, will the car stall if I leave it in gear forever? If so is the trick for manual cars to make sure the rpm doesn't dip too low? What about moving around in a parking lot or backing up into a spot? Is it possible to stall when putting it in reverse?
>> Yes and yes. It is possible to stall in reverse (and first gear) but more difficult as it doesn't take much gas at all to increase the rpms. It would only really happen if you did not accelerate before releasing the clutch. This is why most stalling occurs at stoplights in first gear when people take their foot off of the clutch too soon.
>> i see when backing up my friend blips the throttle once in a while but idk why but I think he's trying to get his rpms up or keep them up while backing up. Is it possible to Rev the car while it's in reverse? I don't think so but either way idk how he does it.
>> Yes it is possible, yet rather pointless. If you hold the clutch in and push the gas, then the engine revs without transferring the power to the wheels. The more practice you get, the smoother you can maintain rpms and clutch movement.
>> If I'm on a flat surface or reversing slightly downhill into a parking spot, I barely need the accelerator, if at all. As /u/McBilboSwagginz says it's harder to stall in 1st or 2nd. My engine idles around 800rpm and simply lifting off the clutch in a smooth, progressive manner is enough to get initial movement after which I can accelerate or drop the clutch and let momentum take over. The latter is usually fine when I've just edged forward in slow moving traffic... I end up progressing in first shortly and then coasting forward using momentum in neutral.
Learning clutch control is a very useful thing indeed.
>> Late response but when reversing you often (never on my car really) fully release the clutch because the lowest rpm it won't stall at is too fast to safely reverse. Therefore you need to constantly slip the clutch which will give you more or less uneven reving (to accelerate or slow down).
>> I still find myself "pulsing" with a stroke of the clutch when doing slow tight stuff in reverse. Like, you raise the revs just a bit as you come to the bite point, and instead of finishing the release of the clutch, just drop it back down.
Modern engines seem pretty good at moving off while holding revs at idle, especially diesels. Maybe I've a habit leftover from carburetors that wouldn't automatically raise idle under load.


